---
layout: default
title: Tooltips
permalink: /projects/gridsvg/demos/tooltips/
---

We can demonstrate basic interactivity in gridSVG by drawing a plot that produces tooltips. These tooltips appear whenever the mouse hovers over a graphical element in the plot and the text within the tooltip features the name of the grid graphics object that produced the element.

This tooltip demonstration was largely borrowed from [Paul Murrell's](https://www.stat.auckland.ac.nz/~paul/) [gridDebug](https://r-forge.r-project.org/projects/griddebug/) package, specifically with regards to the `addTooltips` function. A few modifications were made to the implementation of `addTooltips`, mostly with regards to the JavaScript code and using the `onmousemove` event attribute instead of `onmouseover`.

<object data="/projects/gridsvg/demos/tooltips/tooltips.svg" type="image/svg+xml" width="568" height="567"></object>

One of the demos from the lattice package has been drawn, upon drawing we apply the `addTooltips` function to add tooltips to the plot. The effect of this is that when hovering the mouse over a graphical element in the plot, we can see the name of the grid graphics object that produced it.

* [Download the code](/projects/gridsvg/demos/tooltips/tooltips-code.zip)
* <a id="gridsvg-code-toggle" href="#">Show me the code and how it works</a>

{% capture hiddencontent %}

{% highlight r %}
library(gridSVG)
{% endhighlight %}

Here we are simply loading gridSVG.

{% highlight r %}
# General function to apply a function to each element of the
# grid display list - should end up in 'grid' itself
grid.DLapply <- function(fun, ...) {
    # Traverse DL and do something to each entry
    gridDL <- grid:::grid.Call.graphics("L_getDisplayList")
    gridDLindex <- grid:::grid.Call.graphics("L_getDLindex")
    for (i in 1:gridDLindex) {
        elt <- grid:::grid.Call.graphics("L_getDLelt", i)
        grid:::grid.Call.graphics("L_setDLindex", i)
        grid:::grid.Call.graphics("L_setDLelt", fun(elt, ...))
    }
    grid:::grid.Call.graphics("L_setDLindex", gridDLindex)
}
{% endhighlight %}

Here we define a function called `grid.DLapply`. For every graphics object on the display list, this function applies a given function to those graphics objects.

{% highlight r %}
# Add tooltip attributes to a grob on the DL
garnishAllGrobs <- function(elt) {
    if (inherits(elt, "grob")) {
        garnishGrob(elt,
                    onmousemove=paste("showTooltip(evt, '",
                      gsub("\n", " ", elt$name), "')",
                      sep=""),
                    onmouseout="hideTooltip()")
    } else {
        elt
    }
}
{% endhighlight %}

A function has been defined that, upon encountering a graphics object, adds event attributes to it using `garnishGrob` (see [`grid.garnish`](/projects/gridsvg/docs/grid-garnish/)). The `onmousemove` attribute has been added, and every time that event is triggered on an element, it will execute the following JavaScript code: `showTooltip(evt, [name])`. `[name]` is just the name of the graphics object that is being inspected. Another attribute is added too, `onmouseout`, and when it is triggered, the JavaScript code `hideTooltip()` is executed. These functions are yet to be defined, so are currently assumed to exist when gridSVG attempts to write an SVG file.

{% highlight r %}
addTooltips <- function(filename="Rplots.svg") {
    grid.DLapply(garnishAllGrobs)
    grid.script(filename="tooltip.js")
    gridToSVG(filename)
}
{% endhighlight %}

This is where the previously defined functions are glued together to add tooltips to a grid plot. Firstly we apply the `garnishAllGrobs` function to every element on the display list using `grid.DLapply`. Now all of our graphics objects have event attributes which will execute JavaScript code once triggered. The definition of the JavaScript functions used in the event attributes exists in `tooltip.js`, so we include it using [`grid.script`](/projects/gridsvg/docs/grid-script/). Finally, once the JavaScript has been included, we write the grid plot an SVG image.

{% highlight r %}
library(lattice)
demo(lattice) # We're going to use demo #3
addTooltips("tooltips.svg")
{% endhighlight %}

Here we're simply going to use the lattice package and use one of its demo plots to illustrate tooltip usage. In particular we're going to draw the third lattice demo. Once the demo has been drawn, we attempt to add tooltips to the plot by saving the plot as `tooltips.svg` using `addTooltips`.

{% endcapture %}

<div id="hidden-gridsvg-code">
{{ hiddencontent | markdownify }}
</div>

<script type="text/javascript" src="/scripts/gridsvg-scripts.min.js"></script>
